morning everyone i hope everyone's
feeling reasonably recovered from all
the parties last night and lovely to be
here in barcelona
uh my name is harry briggs i'm going to
be talking about scaling across markets
and um
uh i think originally by the way i
should confess this talk was going to be
given by my colleague jambu who scaled
uber across multiple markets i'll talk a
bit more about him in a session in in a
second uh but um but i'm um
uh his obviously partner and uh and had
my own much more modest story um so a
little bit about me
so i started my career sorry some of
these haven't quite come through
mckinsey
then
i
started a drinks company called firefly
which you may have seen it's still
around we started it way back i'll talk
a bit more about it and
and scaled it across 30 markets and
eventually sold it to private equity
around 2012.
um then i became a vc at bulletin um
and
uh now i'm a vc at omaz ventures
a global canadian uh venture investor
early stage investor uh and uh i should
probably mention as it's kind of pride
month i've done quite a bit for the sort
of pushing diversity in the venture well
obviously limited success but a little
perhaps
um
and um
this is our team today
as you can see we like hanging out in uh
woodlands in buckinghamshire and we seem
to have a propensity for wearing yellow
and the guy in the middle there is jambu
who as i say might have been on stage
but he um
his wife gave birth to a baby girl on
friday which is why he is uh you've got
me instead
um
so um
over the course of um
now nearly 12 years in venture i've been
lucky enough to work with some pretty
amazing founders i'm sorry some of these
logos seem to have got a little bit
corrupted in the transfer just now uh
but um
uh but yes companies like revolut the
heart group gusto paddle
and as you can see a lot of these
companies
have
scaled to multiple markets and uh and
built global businesses um and i've been
lucky enough to see something of their
journeys along the way
um but um i thought i'd start a little
bit i realized that my company was not a
sas company
but my um the company that i founded
mainly because i think it taught me a
few lessons about some of the things not
to do when scaling internationally so
fireply um was and
as you can see we started it in 2003 we
launched and uh the idea was it was a
healthy natural energy drink um
a sort of healthier alternative to the
red bulls that were huge at the time
still are pretty huge
um
and then a weird thing happened which is
that within about um
three months of us launching we launched
in harvey nichols and selfridges and
some variant market london stores
we we got a call from this very cool
shop in paris called colette
and they said hey we've seen your drink
in selfridges can we order some for
paris and we had this weird dilemma of
like you know we were thinking our plan
was stay in the uk for two or three
years figure out you know what we're
doing and then scale internationally
maybe next market after that
but before we knew it you know we
couldn't really say no to colette they
were a very trendy store they said look
we'll handle all the customs don't worry
then we got a call from denmark and then
a call from japan
and
before we knew it we were in 20
countries um
and that seemed great at the time we
were like well look we're our sales are
growing we're selling pallets and
pallets of drinks and containers of
drinks to across the world it's very
exciting we feel cool
um
but
then you start to realize some of the
downsides of that like
the distraction uh like the fact that
you know some of our labels had to be in
multiple languages which meant that when
we changed a product we had to sort of
change a whole lot of different labels
meant that our inventory became more
complicated all the sort of stuff that
you would expect as a former management
consultant to have thought about but um
uh you uh you know you can easily
overlook
um anyway
i'm gonna skip forward because clearly
this was not a sas company and you want
to focus on some of the bigger learnings
here but um we hit the global financial
crisis in 2009 2008 um
we needed to scale back
that
gave me an opportunity to move into vc
at bulletin which was great and in 2012
we sold the business to private equity
um made some money for our investors
sadly not a lot for ourselves
but um as i say learn quite a few things
along the way
so
um
i am i'm going to talk a bit about some
lessons learned from that experience
some lessons learned from jambu's uber
experience and some lessons learned from
some of the companies i've been lucky
enough to
to to work with over the last decade
so the first rule of international
expansion um
anybody anybody want to guess
that's a very good one but mine was
don't do it
[Laughter]
but yeah that's kind of the same keep it
simple
uh so um
why why do i say that well
first look at look at uber um i'm sorry
if you can't read all the all the names
here but um
look at how big they were able to get
just scaling
across more cities in the u.s and how
much simpler it is to scale to another
u.s city versus scaling to
bangalore or lyon or melbourne for
example um
and um
so i think the
question that you should be asking when
you're thinking about going
international is
are you expanding to escape your
problems or do you actually have
something worth scaling
and look i
i've confession
firefly
you know we had a really good launch
sales were growing really fast and then
they were beginning to kind of plateau a
little and so when these international
sales came through it was like great we
can hit our targets by selling pellets
to the middle east and
obscure caribbean islands um
but
it didn't necessarily solve our problems
um and it probably was distracting us
from figuring out
how to scale properly
so um let's look back at this uber
expansion um again you know the the
jambu part of the story
so
they were only in san francisco for more
than a year when they started
um they didn't go international you
can't quite see the bottom here but um
that's uh that's 2010
2012 paris
um
uh and but but look at what happens here
in 2013 incidentally a few months after
jambu joins the business to run
international expansion in emea um
uh
they're suddenly able to scale to
multiple cities in a very short space of
time at one point they were opening a
new city every three days
and that's because they'd finally you
know figured out a playbook that figured
out how to scale properly and i'll come
back to some of the some of the ways
that they did that
so um
so assuming that we're going to ignore
the don't do it what questions should we
be asking before expanding
um
first question have we got it right
and i'm going to go into these in a few
more in a bit more detail but you know
have we got the business right is this
is this working
have we got it repeatable so it might be
working in this market but have we just
been lucky have we had great pr have we
had something that isn't necessarily
easy to replicate in new markets
do we understand what is different about
the next market
again i'll come back to more of this do
we have the team for expansion
and
for uber that was probably the most
important thing
and um
and is it worth it
is it gonna give us a good roi
so here are some questions
um
to uh to perhaps assess you know have we
got it right that first question
so do customers love our product
in firefly's case
we actually had very good mps score you
know we were we were we were pretty
pretty confident on that front
are the customers staying
now in uber's case uh as you probably
know they built their business a lot
around referrals and giving people free
rides and then they found that once
people had had a couple of free rides
they tended to stay
and
you know in firefly's case we had very
little data
um we knew how much the stores were
selling but we didn't know whether it
was the same people buying multiple
times or lots of people trying it once
and never coming back
um so
the joy of software businesses clearly
do we have a scalable acquisition model
uh i'll give you some measures on this
as well and do we feel good about the
unit economics
so um
there's a lot on the slide now sorry but
um
obviously measures for this
net promoter score are they staying
we can look at the retention we can look
at the
cohort
ideally particularly in marketplace
businesses cohorts should be improving
as you scale so uber as you probably
know
they would start in a very small part of
the city
um they'd get really good supply in that
small area so that the customer got a
great first experience and then once
they had evidence that you know people
were coming back and ordering more ubers
then they could gradually expand the
area that uber covered until they
covered the whole city and
uh
and that should improve because
obviously that product experience is
improving as you have more drivers and
so you should see an improvement
do we have a scalable acquisition model
so you know you can look at what
percentage of your customers are coming
through organic
you can look at how many customers are
referring more customers obviously cac
ltv
um we'll we'll know about in in the sas
world
and
gross margin and contribution margin
clearly you only want to be scaling
if
you've got you know at least visibility
of positive contribution margins right
you don't want to be scaling and losing
more money with every extra customer
which there are a few examples of um
recently
um
again my my learnings are firefly here
you know we we had the nps
but uh we didn't necessarily have the
data um i just wanted to highlight a
couple of uh one other example so paddle
um
uh did how many people saw christian
present here yesterday
brilliant uh and i can't see him here
but um uh but no i was lucky enough to
be one of his first backers as a vc
and um
uh i think for for paddle they had
amazing retention uh and fantastic unit
economics um but i would say they they
took a while to find their expansion
playbook and it wasn't really until they
hired a dedicated us team so they they
were they were uk based and selling
globally from the uk for a long time um
it wasn't until they had a team
completely dedicated to the us that the
us really really started to take off and
i suppose one other learning there in
terms of the repeatable was you know
they they had one huge whale customer
they called macpaw um and macport kept
growing themselves so it was flattering
their growth numbers
um but it it it's easy to con to sort of
convince yourself hey it's great we're
growing
everything's good but actually you still
might not have a scalable acquisition
model because you might just be growing
the customers you already have which is
obviously a great thing in sas but um
may not be enough
um
second big question is our success
repeatable
so um
do we know what levers to pull so
if you're if you're uber and you're
scaling
um what are your levers you can uh try
and have more drivers on the platform
you can
uh change the referral bonuses uh you
can obviously you know do more marketing
can do more pr
secondly do we know how to be more
efficient now than we were back then so
um
ideally every new country you go into
you know every country is going to have
issues we'll talk about that in a second
but
uh you want to be you want to know that
there's that you're learning something
you're improving the playbook each time
and lastly back to that scalable
acquisition model so um some of the
measures here
uh
the from the playbook you can obviously
look at you know what are the what are
the what's what's the cac
uh which is obviously going to vary by
market and therefore how much are you
prepared to invest
uh in each new market depending on how
those first few months go
um
as i say you should be improving the the
playbook and uh
and
a lot of the same you know referral rate
organic acquisition that we mentioned
the previous one
um i'm gonna skip over this because i
think i've covered it but um
a couple of more relevant examples to
you perhaps
um
so
uh go cardless i was fortunate enough to
to also invest when i was at bulletin um
i think um
uh the
in in that kind of company where you
have a regulated entity uh you've got
some additional questions
uh around you know the key thing for
them was they needed to be
to get a sort of pan-european license
and that allowed them to scale across
europe rapidly but they were also
waiting for
a lot of european countries to implement
the sort of direct debit the common it's
called super direct debit platform
before they could really scale and so
they were kind of dependent on external
forces
plum guide um actually just sorry one
one other thing on gocardless was um
they were scaling nicely in the uk but
perhaps they were going after the wrong
customer initially so they were they
were particularly going after
uh companies that sold a lot of consumer
direct debits
but um shortly after i um stepped off
the board there they they figured out
that actually the biggest market they
could go after was b2b invoice payments
um and the moment that they figured that
out that was suddenly a much much more
scalable business that they could roll
out way faster
and again perhaps if they'd been trying
to manage too many markets too soon they
wouldn't have figured that out
uh so um
and the plum guide is a kind of premium
airbnb
uh that i've i've i've been close to for
for a few years and uh
i think for them this is a different
proposition because um obviously
travelers don't want to only go to one
city so you can launch in london but
uh it's very very hard to market only to
people coming to london
um so it was very key for them that they
rolled out to a lot of cities quite
quickly
the trouble was that they had because
they're very premium proposition where
they were testing every
every home and making sure it lived up
to their standard and they were only
approving 10 of homes um
that's hard to scale
uh but the pandemic actually helped them
because
you know
it forced them to be way more efficient
it forced them to conserve cash and they
managed to automate a lot of those tests
and they changed the model slightly so
that
um i hope i'm not portraying confidence
is here but uh they don't actually do
the test until the first booking comes
in
and then obviously if that isn't up to
scratch
they find an alternative home
uh but
the you know their biggest problem was
they were having to test all these homes
before they knew whether they were
actually going to be profitable good
homes that people wanted to book
and once they figured that out they were
way more able to scale
thirdly do we understand what is
different um
this is a very very old
article carrefour exiting japan and
mexico and another one this is from 10
years ago
tesco's american dream over do you
remember they
um they the the brits in the room i know
or the americans in obscure parts of
california might know that um
they
launched a new retail concept in
california they invested well over a
billion in it
and despite the fact that car 4 had
failed in multiple markets despite the
fact that
the endless
road kill of retailers going
internationally you know tesco did
acres and acres of research and
focus groups and consumer testing and
they were absolutely convinced that
fresh and easy was going to solve every
consumer's problems in
in in california but
you know it failed
um and uh
uh you know it's it's it's hard um so
i guess really really understanding
what's different about the market
now these are the questions that uber
tended to ask when they entered new
markets
firstly what are our non-negotiables
and secondly where do we have to adapt
so as you know uber played a little bit
fast and loose when they were expanding
they definitely asked for forgiveness
rather than permission
and that worked in some markets and
somewhere like cape town
it's probably the right strategy but
maybe not in berlin or
copenhagen um where i think you know
they've they've really struggled because
they've
fallen out with their regulators so much
um
and and then where do we have to adapt
um you know clearly
every market you know particularly in
financial services or fintech uh every
market has its nuances and some of those
are worth
you know investing in solving for and
sometimes it's just not worth it
um my learnings from the firefly days
you know i i mentioned
obviously we had to translate all our
labels into multiple languages and i
mean i do remember this sort of
hilarious moment when our japanese
distributor was having to stick
manually stick a label on every single
one of i think two and a half thousand
bottles she said she organized a kind of
party for her friends to come and help
it doesn't sound much of a party uh but
um
you know we also had some ingredients
because we were using various herbal
medicinal products um the regulations
were different in every market and they
were allowed in some markets and not in
others um so then we found ourselves
more and more constrained because
obviously we didn't want to make a drink
that could only be sold
in some of our markets
uh but ultimately that kind of meant the
product got a bit watered down you know
it wasn't quite as powerful as it might
have been
it obviously slowed our product
development because we had to you know
verify everything in multiple markets
each time we change the product
and as i say it took away our focus from
having a scalable repeatable model and i
think
if we had really really focused on okay
what is our playbook in the uk
to you know reach true product market
fit and really really figure that out i
think i think it would have been better
um
the um
that black logo was supposed to be
revolut sorry i don't know what happened
um
and it must be mac to a pc conversion uh
but um
but revolut um as you probably know is
uh is in about it was in the whole of
europe and australia japan singapore
switzerland
uh i i was lucky enough to be part of
revolut's um seed round and uh
uh they um they you know
they they roll out rapidly obviously
they've had a number of you know
regulatory challenges as they've grown
um and one of the um
one of the key ones has been obviously
their crypto trading which is a big
revenue driver for them um they're
allowed to do that in some markets but
not on others likewise their
share trading regulated differently in
different markets and obviously them you
know being being able to offer full
banking services as opposed to just
deposit services um is something they're
still working on in in many markets um
but uh but clearly they were you know
keen to be international from day one um
but compare that to c legals
all right well i'm an angel investor uh
that is um that allows how many people
know c legals
cool
sea legals allows you to do all of your
legal setup of your company and uh and
and and raise
money um in a sort of automated way um
they're only in the uk and france
because the legal system is so different
in every country that to replicate that
in every market is possible but requires
huge investment clearly
um
then
do we have the right team um i'm going
to speed up a little here but um
uh clearly this was a massive part of
uber's success they gave a lot of
autonomy to teams in each in each city
um jambu at one point was as i say
hiring
a team and or at least a leader for a
new city every week
and um
and then i guess looking at how well
they execute compared to other cities
and making the changes rapidly when
they're not working out
um but also do we have the talent
centrally um
clearly you know you need a reporting
structure you need
someone like ajamboo who's able to
motivate the team
uh and and you know check how it's going
and um
you know firefly wise by the way you
know we we we operated in a different
way which was that we had a whole lot of
distributors come to us and say hey can
we distribute your product in denmark or
sweden or wherever it was and and our
management um you know we eventually
hired someone who just made sure that
everyone was sharing best practice
between those markets so you know here
are the latest marketing materials here
are the latest uh things that we're
finding are working you know this is how
to do a sampling well this is the kinds
of stores that you should be in
these this is the best shelf space to be
in the products you want to be near all
that kind of thing
um
uh that was my firefly team when we were
in 30 countries it wasn't it wasn't a
very big team
and
i think that was probably part of the
problem
um
and uh but obviously awesome people um
is it worth it what's the upside of the
expansion can we reach a large town with
our home market as mentioned and do we
have the cash clearly we've seen a lot
of companies fail because they
splash out a lot of money to expand
internationally
and then find actually the new market
just isn't as good as the previous one
um
and um
in the current climate where it's a
little bit harder to raise money
particularly if the united economics
aren't there um you know it's a big risk
so do you want to
test
you know that that second city a little
bit more gradually first
and prove yourself
um
and um look you don't have to go
international gusto
again um i i've been an investor while i
was an investor in a previous fund and
uh
gusto is um
the the the sort of more premium hello
fresh in the uk if you like um and
they've become the market leader in the
uk
uh and by relentlessly focusing on
executing in the uk you know they've
built a really valuable business they
recently got valued at well over a
billion um and um
they made the call early on look we just
want to be the winner in this market and
because
they're able to bring a whole lot of
automation into their into their um you
know factories because they're able to
really optimize distribution uh you know
they're able to build a more profitable
business than perhaps if they're trying
to do multiple markets at once
um
oh dear sorry these uh
these logos didn't come through but this
was supposed to be some of the more
successful companies i've worked with uh
like revolut like gocardless um that um
obviously did uh go international and
are all now you know billion plus
valuation companies so
uh
just to just a reminder that you know um
you don't have to but obviously it's
great if you can
and um
there are alternatives you can go deeper
in your home market
uh you can go vertically versus
horizontally
um
i guess um
uh
uh firefly wise you know we um
we we we tried to expand in terms of the
range you know we brought out a water
range
we we looked at doing shots we looked at
more occasions for the drinks
um but ultimately
i think you know the right strategy
there would probably have been more of
the kind of red bull like strategy which
is have one
really kind of ownable proposition
um revolut as i said you know they've
expanded into crypto trading share
trading um business banking whereas
someone like stripe has just been you
know very very horizontal and and global
in terms of expansion models um a few
things to think about
the role of technology clearly
how centralized are you going to be are
you going to give autonomy to markets
like as uber did um or are you just
going to have the same product
everywhere more like paddle for example
um
are there partners you can work with
that was our strategy at
at firefly um how capital intensive are
you going to be about it and um
and who can help who's done it before
who
uh you know hopefully your investors
have done this
obviously omar's ventures has people in
toronto and new york in
in palo alto so you know we'd like to
think we can certainly help with
expansion that way
plug over and then obviously which
country first
um so where do you have a structural
advantage today um
if it's a law company
and you're in the uk you've probably got
a structural advantage in other
companies that use english law or that
certainly look to english law
what's the regulatory climate clearly
some are more similar than others um
and when do you take on the most
competitive market this is a big
question that often comes up on the
boards that i'm on which is that um
uh clearly taking on the most
competitive market is going to be really
expensive and really risky
but
the downside of not taking on the most
competitive market is that maybe
you don't have to
kind of force yourself to get up to the
standard of the very best and what we
have seen in europe quite a bit is
companies that became
you know regional winners but then
the the global winner came in at some
point and kind of
steamrolled not completely but you know
eroded their market and stopped them
from growing and so
look i think if you do believe that
you've got a superior product that can
win internationally
i would embrace it uh but um but clearly
there's a lot of roadkill of companies
that probably could have become regional
winners
but
tried you know too hard to compete
against someone better funded with
perhaps a better product
um so just coming back to uber um uh
back to jambu the guy in the woods um in
our team
um
and uh
uh here are sort of his key lessons from
that experience
so they were very good i'm just gonna
change hands sorry um they're very good
at uh at
building a playbook um and constantly
iterating it and improving it with every
market they went into
uh and you know this playbook came
you know literally every detail of how
to launch a market uh uh it was
basically an asana uh but it was a full
project plan and you could give it to
someone and say go
and and you know obviously there were
plenty of questions but they they went
um
clearly you need to understand what's
different and
i think uber would say that you know
they probably didn't do a good enough
job of this in in some markets
but in uber's case
it might be
you know how much drivers are paid
uh or how good is the existing taxi
competitive infrastructure or you know
how aggressive are the regulators in the
city
um
culture carriers again uber got a lot of
bad press as they were growing for some
of their
um cultural errors uh i think at the
same time though they did have an
incredible culture where a culture of
performance where people were
incredibly motivated and you know worked
incredibly hard and
and i think
you're always going to have things that
go wrong in that climate i think perhaps
what they could have done a little more
is have a few more examples
um from senior leadership of
you know making the right call
rather than always the most aggressive
call um and i think you know they they
might have ended up in a better place
today if they had
um and keeping the hiring bar high um
you know i learn every day from my
colleague jambo on this um that
you know we all know that uh you know
one
b player in a team can lead to a lot of
c players quite rapidly uh and and
making those calls early and uh and
keeping the bar high and only entering a
market once you've found that a player i
think is probably key to their their
expansion
um a few final thoughts
so
clearly when you're expanding
internationally the second market is
usually the hardest because you don't
have a playbook yet
um and you're going to be hit with a
whole lot of surprises um
write the playbook once you've done it
because you're you're going to be busy
you're going to be uh you know running
around solving issues every time one of
these things comes up note it down put
it in the plan for the next one try and
avoid it happening again
uh
clearly lesson for me particularly you
know you're unlikely to find product
market fit and country 2 if you haven't
found it in country 1.
and sustainable scale models um
clearly the there are you know
there are the models of let's go to 50
markets and let's raise hundreds of
millions and even if we get massively
diluted hopefully we'll win there are
also models where
you you grow sustainably i mean in the
uk
pizza express for example
for many years rolled out by
taking the cash flow from the successful
restaurants they had and deploying that
into the next restaurant it allowed them
to open you know two a year and then
maybe three a year and then maybe four
year four year and they built an amazing
business you know worth hundreds of
millions in that approach and retained a
lot of the equity um and so
you know don't uh don't rule that out
and just to reiterate the team the team
the team
uh you know getting the right people to
lead this um you probably heard jason
yesterday talking about uh sales
directors you know probably the hardest
role that i see in the companies i work
with is you know a european team
hiring their first u.s sales director
and they always seem to get it wrong um
and uh and they probably always give
that person a bit too long
before they realize they've got it wrong
um but uh you know take advice from the
good founders you know who've managed to
get it right um
uh do all those referrals don't don't
fall into that kind of optimistic trap
of we found someone i want them to be
right so
that's just you know that's
confirmation by us our way into hiring
them
um
sadly uh we've only got two minutes left
so
i might have time for like one question
if anybody had a question
uh
i'll have to probably give you the mic
if so oh there's a mic a raving mic
somebody be brave
and if not
ah
there we go
hi hi
thanks for a great talk so as as a
founder who is
considering international expansion
and you talk a lot about doing research
and even big companies like you were
getting it wrong
so
how do you
for example let's
we are a spanish company let's assume
just for the sake of discussion that we
want to expand to china right
worst idea in the world but let's assume
that
there are so many unknown unknowns that
we wouldn't even know how to start so
how to start doing research for a new
market when
you know nothing about it
and i mean china is an extreme an
extreme example but let's say france
italy the uk even within europe there
are many things that you wouldn't know
unless you're an expert or you have
lived there for many years
um it's a it's a it's a great question
so um
uh how do you get into a market that you
know nothing about um i mean look the
only company i've been involved with
that has expanded to china successfully
was the hut group
um out of um
which is an e-commerce player and the
reason that they expanded was that they
started to get demand there
they they happened to be selling for
example a whole lot of
protein
that
a lot of chinese
consumers were nervous of buying the
local
protein and when they saw that start to
happen they started to explore it more
and i
i mean obviously i don't know what your
business is but but i think when you
start to see organic demand from a
market that's often a good way to start
because then you can go to those
customers and say you know
why are you buying this
you know what are the local alternatives
what's the difference in your market um
and certainly we found with my drinks
company you know we we learnt more from
talking to
the people that loved us
than anything else really um you know
you're trying to find more of those
people
[Music]
you